docs/FAQ.md, before:

# FAQ for miniwdl

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/main/docs/miniwdl-logo.png" width="200"  />

[miniwdl](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/) is a local runner and developer toolkit for
the bioinformatics-focused [Workflow Description Language (WDL)](http://openwdl.org/). 

TIP: If you are new to working with WDL workflow language, you may want to review the open source 'learn-wdl' course' - [link](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl).   

Also there is an embedded short course 'learn-miniwdl' which includes screencasts reviewing the concepts on this page in more detail - [link](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl/tree/master/6_miniwdl_course)

## Common Questions

###  Install and verify miniwdl

- Q: miniwdl won't install (or work) on my machine
  - Verify installation of Python 3.6+
  - Verify installation of Docker.

- Q: miniwdl isn't working on my Mac
  - Verify Docker version (17+) and user permission for Docker.
  - You'll first need to override the `TMPDIR` environment variable, e.g. `export TMPDIR=/tmp` to allow Docker containers to mount shared working directories. 
  - Please [file any other issues](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/issues) that arise!

- Q: the ```miniwdl run``` command won't run my WDL workflow
  - Verify that each workflow task runs from a Docker container image.
  - Define the container image in the WDL script (task section(s)).

- Q: what is the quickest way to verify that miniwdl is properly installed?
  - Run ```miniwdl --help``` and review the list of possible commands.

---

### Run WDL workflow with the ```miniwdl run``` command

- Q: what is simplest way to test running a WDL workflow on miniwdl?
  - Run ```miniwdl run_self_test``` - it includes an example workflow.
  - Verify this job returns the ```ok``` and ```done``` messages as expected.

- Q: how can I run a quick ```hello.wdl``` WDL workflow?
  - Copy [this file](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl/blob/master/6_miniwdl_course/1_hello.wdl) to your miniwdl development environment.
  - Run ```miniwdl run hello.wdl```, there are no input parameters used in this quick test.

- Q: Where is the job output from miniwdl job?
  - miniwdl produces workflow, task and job logs as well as task output.  
  - See the folder\file structure generated for each job run for these files.

- Q: What does ```miniwdl run myfile.wdl``` do?
  - If your WDL file defines inputs and outputs, then it prints a list of inputs and outputs and notes which inputs are required.

- Q: How to do I assign values to input variables when I use miniwdl to run a WDL file?
  - you can assign directly on the command line, i.e. ```miniwdl run myfile.wdl input1=input.bam input2= input.bai, etc...``` 
  - or you can use the ```--input``` flag and assign input values via an ```input.json``` file

- Q: How can I get more information about job execution?
  - Run the ```miniwdl run myfile.wdl``` command
  - Use the ```--verbose``` flag

- Q: What is the ```_LAST``` directory?
  - miniwdl generates a symbolic link `_LAST` pointing to the timestamped subdirectory for most recent run,
    and an `out` directory tree containing symbolic links to the output files.

---

### Scaling up `miniwdl run`

- Q: Can miniwdl handle large-scale workloads?
  - A more-powerful host enables larger workloads, as it schedules WDL tasks in parallel up to the avaliable CPUs & memory
  - The optimization guide has [host configuration suggestions](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/runner_advanced.html#host-configuration)
- Q: Can miniwdl run workflows on my cloud/cluster?
  - If you can factor the workload into separate workflow runs, submit each one as a job to run miniwdl on a powerful worker node.
  - [Alternate container runtimes](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/runner_backends.html) widen compatibility
  - The separately-maintained [miniwdl-aws](https://github.com/miniwdl-ext/miniwdl-aws) plugin provides task scheduling on AWS Batch

---

### Check WDL syntax with the ```miniwdl check``` command

- Q: When I run ```miniwdl check myfile.wdl``` it doesn't produce any output
  - Re-run the command, sometimes it takes a couple of seconds to complete the WDL file parsing

- Q: Do I have to fix all of items listed (warnings) in the results of ```miniwdl check myfile.wdl``` 
  - This command generates both warnings (which you optionally fix) and errors (which you must fix).
  - Errors are shown in red.

---

### Links

* [chanzuckerberg/miniwdl GitHub](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/) where issues & contributions are welcome
* [openwdl/wdl GitHub](https://github.com/openwdl/wdl) for WDL spec & proposals
* [OpenWDL Slack #miniwdl](https://openwdl.slack.com/archives/C02JCRJU79T) for discussions
* [CZI Science Tech](https://tech.chanzuckerberg.com/scitech/) sponsors this project

Commit message:

docs links to miniwdl-omics-run

docs/FAQ.md, after:

# FAQ for miniwdl

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/main/docs/miniwdl-logo.png" width="200"  />

[miniwdl](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/) is a local runner and developer toolkit for
the bioinformatics-focused [Workflow Description Language (WDL)](http://openwdl.org/). 

TIP: If you are new to working with WDL workflow language, you may want to review the open source 'learn-wdl' course' - [link](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl).   

Also there is an embedded short course 'learn-miniwdl' which includes screencasts reviewing the concepts on this page in more detail - [link](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl/tree/master/6_miniwdl_course)

## Common Questions

###  Install and verify miniwdl

- Q: miniwdl won't install (or work) on my machine
  - Verify installation of Python 3.6+
  - Verify installation of Docker.

- Q: miniwdl isn't working on my Mac
  - Verify Docker version (17+) and user permission for Docker.
  - You'll first need to override the `TMPDIR` environment variable, e.g. `export TMPDIR=/tmp` to allow Docker containers to mount shared working directories. 
  - Please [file any other issues](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/issues) that arise!

- Q: the ```miniwdl run``` command won't run my WDL workflow
  - Verify that each workflow task runs from a Docker container image.
  - Define the container image in the WDL script (task section(s)).

- Q: what is the quickest way to verify that miniwdl is properly installed?
  - Run ```miniwdl --help``` and review the list of possible commands.

---

### Run WDL workflow with the ```miniwdl run``` command

- Q: what is simplest way to test running a WDL workflow on miniwdl?
  - Run ```miniwdl run_self_test``` - it includes an example workflow.
  - Verify this job returns the ```ok``` and ```done``` messages as expected.

- Q: how can I run a quick ```hello.wdl``` WDL workflow?
  - Copy [this file](https://github.com/openwdl/learn-wdl/blob/master/6_miniwdl_course/1_hello.wdl) to your miniwdl development environment.
  - Run ```miniwdl run hello.wdl```, there are no input parameters used in this quick test.

- Q: Where is the job output from miniwdl job?
  - miniwdl produces workflow, task and job logs as well as task output.  
  - See the folder\file structure generated for each job run for these files.

- Q: What does ```miniwdl run myfile.wdl``` do?
  - If your WDL file defines inputs and outputs, then it prints a list of inputs and outputs and notes which inputs are required.

- Q: How to do I assign values to input variables when I use miniwdl to run a WDL file?
  - you can assign directly on the command line, i.e. ```miniwdl run myfile.wdl input1=input.bam input2= input.bai, etc...``` 
  - or you can use the ```--input``` flag and assign input values via an ```input.json``` file

- Q: How can I get more information about job execution?
  - Run the ```miniwdl run myfile.wdl``` command
  - Use the ```--verbose``` flag

- Q: What is the ```_LAST``` directory?
  - miniwdl generates a symbolic link `_LAST` pointing to the timestamped subdirectory for most recent run,
    and an `out` directory tree containing symbolic links to the output files.

---

### Scaling up `miniwdl run`

- Q: Can miniwdl handle large-scale workloads?
  - A more-powerful host enables larger workloads, as it schedules WDL tasks in parallel up to the avaliable CPUs & memory
  - The optimization guide has [host configuration suggestions](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/runner_advanced.html#host-configuration)
- Q: Can miniwdl run workflows on my cloud/cluster?
  - If you can factor the workload into separate workflow runs, submit each one as a job to run miniwdl on a powerful worker node.
  - [Alternate container runtimes](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/runner_backends.html) widen local compatibility
  - [External plugins](https://miniwdl.readthedocs.io/en/latest/runner_backends.html#external-plugins) enable cloud &cluster integrations, with an API to add new ones.

---

### Check WDL syntax with the ```miniwdl check``` command

- Q: When I run ```miniwdl check myfile.wdl``` it doesn't produce any output
  - Re-run the command, sometimes it takes a couple of seconds to complete the WDL file parsing

- Q: Do I have to fix all of items listed (warnings) in the results of ```miniwdl check myfile.wdl``` 
  - This command generates both warnings (which you optionally fix) and errors (which you must fix).
  - Errors are shown in red.

---

### Links

* [chanzuckerberg/miniwdl GitHub](https://github.com/chanzuckerberg/miniwdl/) where issues & contributions are welcome
* [openwdl/wdl GitHub](https://github.com/openwdl/wdl) for WDL spec & proposals
* [OpenWDL Slack #miniwdl](https://openwdl.slack.com/archives/C02JCRJU79T) for discussions
* [CZI Science Tech](https://tech.chanzuckerberg.com/scitech/) sponsors this project
